All right, everybody. We're going to get
go ahead and get started here. First and
foremost, is everybody hear me? Okay.
Across the back here. Doing well. Okay.
Beautiful. Well, thank you all. so much
for coming to tonight's fireside chat on
Sky Mountain. We have our uh wonderful
guests here today that'll be speaking.
Dr. Raymond Turpin, Dr. Christopher
Beige. Uh we'll give a little bit more
uh into them, but first and foremost,
want to give a big thank you uh to
Melissa and Joe Sridge for letting us uh
stay at this lovely facility here to
have our talk tonight. This is such a
incredible venue in and of itself. Thank
you so much for this opportunity here.
Uh, a couple of housekeeping items there
too. Um, there are bathrooms straight
back by the stairs there. Anybody use
needs to use the restroom. Also, water
stations over there with hot and cold
water. Uh, if anybody needs to stand up,
stretch around, you know, please feel
free to do so. Um, we'll ask that, you
know, welcome to take pictures and such,
but we are taking a formal video which
we will release uh through the
psychedelic society website. So, uh, if
you guys uh can refrain from some video,
we'll we'll make sure that we make that
available to everyone. And uh I'd like
to introduce myself and uh a couple of
the co-founders of Psychedelic Society
and a little bit about what we're about
here. Um my name is Aaron Cruz. Um I'm a
psychedelic ceremonial facilitator. I've
been working with Sacramento anthogenics
for 15 years. Um professional certified
coach, uh thirdwave psychedelic
certified coach, anthropologist by trade
and uh and also I have a couple of other
wonderful um co-f facilitators and also
founders of psychedelic society. We have
Sarah Selix over here, Lavine.
Uh Dan Cashiato over here. And in the
back, Daniel Pope, the original founder
who uh instigated this whole amazing
group here together.
And several community members who have
been a part of uh this experience. I see
some new faces here, but many have been
uh a part of this for now going on over
a little bit over a year. And kind of to
just kind of uh break things up, and
thank you, Chris, for this great idea.
Uh how many of you are new to
psychedelics in general? New to
psychedelics.
>> Okay, awesome. Uh how many of you have
been kind of uh on your own journey with
psychedelics but are still kind of
growing and emerging that maybe the last
few years starting to get some uh steam
and momentum there? Uh any uh tenur
psychonauts and deep divers out here?
Okay, plenty of hands. Excellent. Um
now, how many of you guys work within
the mental health field? Was curious
there.
Okay, awesome.
>> And let's see, let's talk about some
specifics here. Um, favorable to
psilocybin. How many people are
psilocybin is your medicine there?
Excellent. Uh, LSD.
Okay. See several hands going up several
times. Respect. Uh, MDMA.
And how about DMT or IASA? My mother.
>> Okay. Beautiful. Okay. Well, welcome
everybody. This is our tribe. Um, before
we kind of go into things here, I'd like
to kind of set the stage with a little
bit of our mission, our vision, and the
ethics that we represent. Uh, then we'll
kind of dive into the deeper
conversation here. So, a mission of
Psychedelic Society of Asheville is to
educate, advocate, and create community
around the healing and transformational
power of psychedelics. Now, our vision,
we provide support, resources, and a
safe container for those seeking
guidance and healing, spiritual growth,
and personal development through
psychedelics. We serve to foster the
development of an informed culture that
respects indigenous lineage, scientific
research, harm reduction principles,
ethics, and personal responsibility in
the intentional use and facilitation of
psychedelic medicine.
For ethics, uh these containers that we
strive for provide physical safety. Uh
just so you guys know it's very
important that consent is of the highest
priority uh both in uh what you choose
to share, how you choose to share that
and how you choose to express and
experience uh touch and connection. Uh
psychological safety of course is
actually critical importance as well. Uh
what we share here is to be honored
within the confines of this space unless
someone gives you uh a direct word to
take their their truth and sail it
outward. Uh otherwise, please uh honor
uh the the respect of someone's uh own
discretion when they're sharing with you
in this space. Uh transparency uh speak
from the authentic eye. Uh speak from
your own place of value and honor those
of others as well. Uh diversity, equity,
and inclusion. You know, we really
strive to make sure that there is a
balanced representation of gender, uh
balanced representation of culture and
also for people how they selfidentify.
And uh we are on a quest to continue to
make this a more welcoming and inviting
place for all aspects and walks of life.
So if you see people that are
underrepresented and curious about this
particular type of work, uh please
welcome them in and love to make them
feel that this is a home for however you
identify, this is a place for you. Uh
and and we uh we love and we're richer
for it. And self-care is also incredibly
important to us. So uh do what you need
to do to feel healthy. Inhale. Uh that
means, you know, stretching, taking a
moment, you know, all those things are
very, very important. and uh want to
make sure that you have the space to
shake the body. Well, um so with that
there, we're going to kind of dive into
a few more things. Uh but first, you
know what? Let's go ahead and do a land
acknowledgement. Uh we are on Cherokee
Chilagi First Nation land out here. And
in the deep time of our work in
psychedelics and deep time of our work
in stewardship of this planet, uh we
really lean into and learn from the
wisdom of our ancestors. So, I want to
take a moment just to acknowledge that
this is sacred land and that we are
gifted with the opportunity to be
stewards and caretakers of this space
and may we uphold the virtues and values
they have brought before us and carry
that forward. So, let's give a couple
moments to honor uh the Chilagi Cherokee
First Nation.
All right. Now, on to
the talk here. So, we are really
grateful to have two uh amazing
gentlemen here. Uh I know uh Dr. Turpin
doesn't uh maybe describe himself as an
elder yet, but you are an elder to me,
good sir. So, you've made it.
Congratulations.
So we uh you know these two uh
individuals have done so much uh for the
community for uh psychedelics at large
not just you know in this particular
region but uh in the larger movement. So
I'm going to go ahead and introduce the
them uh both you to here for with some
basic bios and then we'll get into some
uh questions here for them. So um Dr.
Beige. Uh, in November 21st, 1979,
Christopher and Beige took the first
step in what would become a
life-changing journey. Drawing from his
training as a philosopher of religion,
Beige set out to explore his mind and
the mind of the universe as deeply and
systematically as possible with the help
of psychedelic drug LSD. Following
protocols established by the great
status of Grav, Beij's 73 highdosese LSD
sessions over the course of 20 years
drew him into a deepening communion with
cosmus consciousness. Christopher Beige
is a professor emeritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at Youngtown State University,
adjunct faculty at the California
Institute of Integral Studies, ameritus
fellow at the Institute of Noetic
Sciences, and on the advisory council of
the Gra Legacy Training. Uh, please
welcome Dr. Chris.
Dr. Dr. Turpin has been studying the
therapeutic use of psychedelics in the
relevant literature since the mid 80s,
hoping to eventually legally use these
medicines in psychology practice.
Specializing in the treatment of trauma,
Dr. Turpin Turpin has extensive
experience with children, adolescence,
and families in a multitude of settings,
but has focused his practice on older
adolescence and adults. In recent years,
Dr. Dr. Turpin earned a bachelor's
degree in psychology at the University
of Georgia in 88, his master's degree in
psychology from the humanistic
psychology program at West Georgia
College in 1990 and his doctoral degree
in clinical psychology from the
California Institute of Integral Studies
in San Francisco CIS in 1999. In 2017,
he earned a certificate in psychedelic
therapy and research from CIS. In
addition to his private psychotherapy
practice in Waysville, North Carolina,
Dr. Dr. Chirpin was a mentor for the
2022 23CIS certificate program and will
be lead mentor as well and a training
mentor in 2324 and he's one of the
co-founders of the Pearl Psychedelic
Institute here in Wesville. Everyone
please welcome Dr. Jordan.
All right, so let's dive into where this
all began. So prior to your first formal
experience,
what first turned you guys on to
psychedelics? What was it about these
compounds that initially piqued your
interest and then sparked engagement?
>> Why don't you start this?
>> Okay. Great. All right.
Uh I would have to go back to probably
198 early 84 probably when I was uh
finishing up my freshman year at the
University of Georgia and just kind of
actually into the summer and I
discovered Flashbacks which was Timothy
Liry's autobiography. he was still alive
at the time and uh I read that and uh
you know I already knew kind of who he
was uh and I was just stunned by the
guy's brilliance in his writing and his
insight and he wrote a good bit about
psilocybin and LSD in that book and uh
then much to my parents chagrin uh all
the way to Mississippi uh at
Thanksgiving I was in the backseat
chattering about Timothy Liry and my dad
was not real excited about that uh he
was a little conservative and uh so it
wasn't until uh October of uh ' 84 where
I managed to score some mushrooms with
two of my good friends that I'd grown up
with and uh we migrated out to this
cemetery outside in Athens, Georgia,
which uh that sounds creepy, but this
was a place we would kind of go and walk
around and just fascinated reading the
gravestones and putting stories
together. It was kind of a sacred place
to us. And so went out there, found a
little field laid down by the creek and
uh I was laying there and I had this
intense vision of just seeing myself. At
the time I was an advertising major. I'd
grown up in Atlanta. Uh had gone to this
prep school with a lot of old Atlanta
money and uh my family was definitely
kind of middle class and so I felt like
I was a dirt farmer and so when I got
out of high school, I thought it was all
about making money. So I figured kind of
creative. I'll do the advertising thing.
And during this uh psilocybin experience
which was quite profound um it just kind
of I saw myself succeeding in this field
and feeling extremely empty about it and
uh there was almost a voice in my head
saying what are you doing you're going
to convince people to buy a bunch of
crap they don't need what are you doing
and I said what am I doing and then I
started figuring out where this is
coming from this this wasn't in the
mushrooms this was unlocking a part of
myself that had kind of been socialized
out over the last few years and it
seemed to be more of my true self so I
got fascinated ated with that and then
started going to the UG library and
pulling off old bound journals and
finding all the old LSD research
particularly from the 50s and the 60s
and realizing uh what all was being done
with these compounds back then and they
were doing uh some pretty amazing
studies and some people that had some
pretty refractory problems were getting
well and then the fact that it had all
been buried uh astounded me and so I
just kind of decided to devote my life
back then um to continuing to study
these things continuing to research them
personally and academically and uh
hopefully be in a position one day to be
able to use these things legally. So
that's kind of how it all got started.
And then the Grateful Dead was a big
piece of it, too. So once I went to my
first dead show, Halloween 1985, uh that
locked me into a whole another level of
psychedelics and using it uh somewhat
ritualistically in large crowds. So uh
that was another big shaper of my
experiences growing up.
>> Oh yeah. Awesome.
>> Yeah. We'll get more there, too.
>> The Grateful Dead, I'm afraid, did not
ever have a significant impact on my
life in that respect. But, uh, I know
deprived. I know
>> I was just out of graduate school, had
gone had been given the opportunity for
a high quality classical Ivy League
education.
I was a pretty confirmed atheistically
inclined agnostic when I finished my
degree in religious studies and
philosophy of religion and uh I met the
work of Stan Gro my I let me back up
Saturn Return just come out of my Saturn
Return just begun my teaching career the
first year of my teaching career looking
around what to do I found Stan's book
Realms of the Human Unconscious and he
lit the fire and I knew that this was
really important to my discipline,
philosophy of religion. And I knew the
only way to really work this was not
intellectually and conceptually, but you
had to do the work. You had to get into
it and do the work. This is 1978, and
the work was illegal at that point. So,
I decided to to be illegal. And I'm not
an illegal person by nature, but I
decided to sort of do my academic work
and to do this work with the idea that
sooner or later somewhere down the road
I would be able to harvest it as a
philosopher of religion to bring it
forward for its cosmological and
philosophical import. I wasn't primarily
interested in therapeutic healing though
a lot of he healing came. I wasn't I
started with an interest in spiritual
awakening kind of accelerating my
spiritual awakening but that kind of got
knocked out within the first couple of
years when the journey took me in a
different way. Uh after about three
sessions, I I always worked in a a
graphian protocol, right? Shades, eye
lying down, headphones, eye shades. I've
never tripped in a classical way. I've
always done therapeutically focused,
intense work. And as you know, if you've
done this work, it amplifies the
intensity of the experience many times.
And I think now that we have the world's
collection of music available to us and
we can contour our sessions with that
music, it just deepens it even further.
I made a choice very early on not to
work therapeutically or not to work with
other people, not to introduce people
into this. A very different
responsibility, a different set of
responsibilities. I always worked solo
and I was concerned just to push the
boundaries as far as I could go. So this
seemed like a wonderful opportunity for
a philosopher to actually get firsthand
experience of some of the things that
some of the great sages and mystics and
had been talking about. And uh so that's
what I did. I jumped in. I followed a
protocol of working after the first few
sessions at high doses of LSD 500 to 600
micrograms. I aimed always at five 600,
but I I lower it to 500 just in case
some of the stuff I was using wasn't
completely pure, though it was all
pharmaceutical grade. I do not recommend
uh this protocol. This is this is not a
layman's protocol. When you work at
those doses, if that consistently over
20 years, it takes you places that are
uh extremely demanding. They require a
great deal of discipline. They require a
great deal of spiritual practice to
stabilize and hold on to those
experiences and to work with them. Uh
yeah, that's that's how I got into it.
>> Wow. Yep. 500. Okay.
Well, so you guys started getting the
momentum. You had the impetus early on
to kind of follow that trail. You know,
for you, Dr. Turpin, you know, the kind
of medicine redirected you or kind of
brought you into a different landscape
in your life and and you had really kind
of set off on this trail through
inspiration for Dr. Sandra. So can you
speak to me about a a particular time
period maybe a paradime shifting moment
for you when you're working with the
medicine that really just opened up uh
you into a new state of awareness and I
know you had many of those expressed in
your particular book there about maybe
where you had felt that this particular
trail or this path it just led you into
a different level of of how your
devotion to this work kind of uh
expanded at that particular time from
from that experience.
want to start.
>> Uh go ahead.
>> All right.
I can't say any one particular period or
one particular time because it true one
of the let me ask for how many people
have read my book LSD in the mind of the
universe that's why okay good so I can
start some from scratch for the majority
working in this very intense fashion
over 20 years
uh there were so many levels of
consciousness that I broke through or
that the universe took me through that I
can't point to any one time period as a
kind of culmination of that period. I
just kept at it and it kept taking me
through level after level after level of
that process. And I learned um
I learned that you have to learn how to
work with these states. I mean they're
really complicated to work with states.
If you're dealing with states at the
personal level, that's kind of one level
of complexity. If you're dealing with
states at the at the collective psyche
level, that's another level of
complexity. If you're pushing beyond
that into archetypal, into causal and
transcending time and space and going
into the deep territory of history, that
I learned requires a tremendous amount
of discipline to stabilize and to to
stay conscious at levels of
consciousness that usually when you
first go into them, it just it takes
your mind right out. It's hard to hold
on to them.
It was the length of the journey and
going through so many stages. I I guess
if I were to point to any one point uh
no I'm not going to point to any one
point there just there's too many stages
going through it. Uh there was one
period of the work when uh we were
experiencing I think it was the Neptune
Uranus conjunction
uh and it was squaring my lunar nodes.
If you're into astrology it was a square
all year long and that particular year
which I think was around 19
93 94 just was ripped open the level and
it it opened up a new level. But that
wasn't the last level. That was just a
new level at that time and it was a it
was an extraordinarily productive level.
But the deeper level, the last five
years of my working was what I called
the diamond luminosity. And I'll just
mention that when I hit the diamond
luminosity material, once I touched that
realm, I wasn't interested in any of the
other realms that I had access getting
up to that level because the power and
intensity of that domain was so
extraordinary and it was so attractive
and so overwhelming that for the last
five years of my work, that was the only
thing I was interested in getting back
to. But in those five years, in 26
sessions, in those five years, I only
got to that dimension four times.
Okay? And that wasn't because that was
because the cycle involves so much
intense purification
in order to get back into that territory
and then to absorb that term going
through. Anyway, I'm getting off on it,
but uh off track, but yeah, I guess the
diamond luminosity would constitute in
some ways a major turning point for me
in that material.
>> I'm afraid my story is a little more
terrestrial than yours.
Uh yeah, I mean, first of all, I am I'm
honored to be on the stage with this guy
here. Um he's his book was incredible
and it meant a lot to me when I did read
it. I felt like I was reading almost
like holy texts or something kind of
coming coming from like the King acid
head or something and and the fact that
he's still intact uh psychologically and
emotionally and everything was really uh
comforting to me when I finally got to
meet him. Um but yeah, I'm kind of like
Chris. I can't really point to an
experience that really was a profound
that stands out more than some of the
others. Um, I just know that, you know,
when I made this decision back in the
mid 80s that I wanted to change my major
to psychology and work with people doing
this work and devote my life really to
studying psychedelics, there was no
support. Uh, I remember I went to the
head of the UG psychology department and
he was like, "Don't waste your time
doing this. This has all been tried.
It's not coming back." Duh. and almost
everybody I went to was not very
encouraging about it at Georgia, which
was kind of a conservative I loved the
school, but it was kind of a
conservative psychology department. So,
I didn't get much uh uh encouragement
there. But uh I did find out about West
Georgia College, which was at the time
was a humanistic psychology program that
had been founded in 1968 in Carolton,
which there's not much going on in
Carolton, Georgia. But uh I got out
there and there was a guy Mike Erenss
who had actually done some work with
creativity and LSD back in the 60s and
uh that's where I got to meet Stan
Krypner. Stan Grath came and did a talk
there. So it was kind of this deepening
and uh and then that's what led me to
California Institute of Integral Studies
which at the time was pretty fringe. It
wasn't even APA accredited. My parents
were completely freaked out. I wanted to
go there and get my doctorate. They're
like how are you ever going to get a
job? And I said I really don't care at
this point. and I want to learn what
they're teaching and then I'll figure it
out uh afterwards. So, I'm not going
there to worrying too much about that.
But then I guess just kind of to kind of
answer your question, I think there was
just so many times of doubt along the
way where I was worried that I was doing
something that was not going to maybe uh
you know work out for me, you know, just
times everybody gets doubts. And then
there was just always something that
would show up that would reassure me and
just kind of say you're on this path and
it's important that you stay on this
path. Um, and I think another lesson I
learned very early on with psychedelics,
and I think this also works as a
psychotherapist, too, is is maintaining
how important it is to maintain humility
when you're working with these
compounds. Um, I can remember when I was
a therapist, you know, somebody come in
and we'd have a great session and I'd be
like, "Man, I got this [__] I'm going
to be I'm Freud, man. I'm going to be
the next Freud. I got this stuff." And
then about the next day, somebody would
come in collapsing and talk about how,
you know, how terrible they were doing.
Then I'd feel like the worst therapist
ever, and I didn't know what I was
doing. And so I learned the hard way to
kind of find the middle ground there.
And I think psychedelics did the same
thing. It does not it wouldn't allow you
to get too down and it wouldn't allow
you to get too high on yourself. I
always found that it would just if I was
getting a little high about something,
it would knock me down and if I was
getting a little low about something, it
would kind of bring me back to that
middle place. So I think it was
important to just trust that uh what
felt like the direction I needed to go
in is what I needed to honor. And I
think that's kind of what was happening
along the way is just having various uh
meeting people at particular times,
having particular experiences that would
just kind of deepen that whole path and
just allow me to just kind of continue
to go on it and feel good about it. I
think that's kind of how it how it
happened.
>> Yeah, I love that for both of you too.
with the catalyst of the psychedelic,
you know, in and of itself. You know,
those moments, although they can be
profound, it seems like the context of
your life, how you synthesized that, how
that encouraged you forward, what you
learned over the larger spectrum is the
real lesson, is the real teaching that
came through. And and so you guys for a
large part of your career is you were
working in what was be considered the
dark ages of psychedelics. Uh between,
you know, the mid 1970s through 2016,
there's a complete moratorium on
research. um you know it was pretty much
ostracized to the far reaches of
academia and culturally outside of the
grateful dead and a few courageous other
uh you know uh keepers of the of the
culture there was very very little kind
of happening at that particular time um
so I guess what encouraged you you spoke
a little bit toward this what encouraged
you to kind of continue on that path
where 360 around you you know people
weren't lifting that up or supporting
you in that in in the fulfillment of
that particular profession and also were
there any kind of prominent mentors over
this period of time either that you met
or perhaps that you were learning from
their work uh extensively and how did
that influence your trajectory as you
continue to move on throughout your
life?
>> I'm going give this
>> Yeah, take it away.
>> Try to remember all that. Um
>> yeah uh I would say uh you know the
thing that probably kept me going more
than anything was the fact that uh you
know I was learning about conventional
psychology and psychotherapy techniques
uh at Georgia and and then later on and
uh there was just when when when I was
reading the old research um there was
just something so unique about the way
that they were working with mental
illness back then and that they were
using LSD and it was a rough treatment.
I mean, people were reliving their their
traumas and so there was a real need to
have safety and trust with your
therapist, unlike MDMA is nice because
it shuts down that amydala and so you
don't have that fight orflight response.
But when you're taking LSD to do trauma
work or psilocybin, it's not working on
the amydala like that. So there's a lot
of anxiety and trepidation and fear that
can come up when you're doing that work.
and um and just noticing the uh
development of psychiatric medications
and the fact that our whole uh drive was
about symptomology and trying to
mitigate symptoms so that people could
get out and function. That was really
what the what the what the point was and
just realizing that we weren't getting
at the core stuff and that reading that
old LSD research, you know, showed that
we were getting at that core stuff and
there were these profound changes taking
place. Um, there was also a lot of
criticism about the research back in the
50s and 60s because it didn't really uh
cotton very well with the old double
blind uh science routine study design
because, you know, when you've got a
placebo and a psychedelic, you're going
to know within an hour who got the
psychedelic and who got the placebo. So,
there was a lot of criticism about it
not being able to be studied
scientifically. Um, and then there were
some study designs back then that I
think were flawed, of course, because
people didn't know what they were
dealing with. they were trying this
stuff for the first time. Um, but I I
would say probably the people that
really influenced me was Stan Grath too.
Um, just still a brilliant guy. Um, when
I read uh Realms of the Human
Unconscious, it was it was a shattering
book for me just realizing that this guy
was going deeper than anybody at the
time. And uh, and then when I got to
CIS, one of the reasons I went out there
was that Stan was teaching. uh Ralph
Mner was out there and uh you know and
then just San Francisco. I got to see
the dead like 12 times a year without
leaving the Bay Area. So that was always
that was kind of another attraction out
there. But uh you know I think Jerry
Garcia was another uh influence of mine.
He wasn't a scientist or a therapist or
anything, but uh he took a lot of
psychedelics and he communicated what he
learned from psychedelics through his
music and uh and his art, his guitar
playing was uh everything. That's all he
was about was uh expressing through
that. And then he ended up falling in
with these other guys that had the same
commitment and the same pathway to
exploring music in the deep psyche. And
so going to those shows was something
that always I would go to those shows
and they would always teach me something
or I would just get reaffirmed that this
this was this mattered. This stuff
mattered and it was going to matter and
it was worth sticking with. Um, so, uh,
and again, I think when I read Chris's
book, uh, I thought that was really, uh,
fabulous because I just thought I'd
always thought, "Wow, what would happen
if you just took all the acid you could
and just went as deep as possible? What
would you find?" Cuz, you know, it seems
like there's this endless well of
something down in there as you go or out
there. And uh, and so when I found his
book, like I said, I was astounded uh,
that somebody had actually done that.
And being able to bring back all that
knowledge about what you experienced was
profound. Um, so, uh, yeah, I've had a
number of of teachers. I think again,
Mike Erenss, he was out at, uh, West
Georgia. There's a couple of West
Georgia alumni here, Steve and David.
Um, those guys remember Mike Erenss, and
I think he was probably pretty important
to you guys, too. He was kind of the
soul of that whole program. And he
really kept it humanistic and, uh, very
different. He didn't worry about APA
accreditation or anything. It was about
people going in there and learning what
he felt like it was important, not only
to be a good therapist, but to grow as a
human being, too. And so that was really
that was really important. Um so yeah
>> you know um Stan was huge influence uh
because he's such a powerful intellect
and he had done 20 years of research
before he wrote realms of the human
unconscious and I could recognize the
caliber of his scholarship and he taught
me just by reading him he taught me some
essential things but I think the most
important thing he taught me was to
absolutely trust the consciousness of
the universe, to trust the process, to
allow yourself to go into unknown
territory, to allow yourself to be
sliced and diced and and broken down, no
matter how bad, no matter how inscrable
it is. If you're working in a safe and
contained environment, surrender
completely to that environment, and
it'll always catch you in the end.
You'll die a hundred times, but it'll
catch you in the end, and it'll embrace
you. And that was a that was the most
and I don't think I would have had the
courage to go some of the places I ended
up going if I hadn't known that Stan had
been there first and he had survived uh
to tell about it. Um,
>> outside of that and and Stan of course
and I became friends and colleagues and
he wrote the forward to dark early dawn
for me and uh and brought me to some of
the ITA meetings where we had wonderful
encounters with different people. But I
never had outside of this intellectual
starting point, I never I always am
envious of people who do awaska work and
they say, "Well, I had this shaman
mentor for 10 years that I worked with
who and this other person I worked with
for another 10 years." And that's just
not my story at all. I've never had a
mentor like that. uh all of my mentoring
came directly from the universe itself
>> which has some advantages and has some
disadvantages you know but I I did not
learn anything from anybody I mean
intellectually but this we're not
talking intellect we're talking about
you know dissolving into the soul of the
universe dissolving into the the
consciousness that that created the
universe about that process I never had
anyone to help me and it was just a
continuous
conversation, but then a communion and
then dissolving deeper and deeper into
that that consciousness, that power
which is the illuminating consciousness
and the origin originating consciousness
of all existence, coming back,
scribbling it down, trying to make sense
of it, and then digesting the larger
overall journey. And when I was doing
it, like you said, it was there was no
one doing it. I mean, I couldn't really
talk. I mean, my friends in the
department knew what I was doing, but
they didn't really know what I was
doing, you know, and I could never I
didn't bring it to campus. I didn't
bring it to my students. I couldn't
teach out of it, which became a real
problem down the road because I'm a
talker. I love to learn and share. But I
could not share this. I couldn't talk
about it. wasn't allowed to be part of
the curriculum. Even though I did teach
courses in psychedelic therapy and I did
teach courses and seminars on Stan's
work and whatnot, I always had to hold
my own personal work back. Uh, and it
wasn't until I really sat after I
retired and I saved writing LSD in the
mind of the universe or my title for
that book is Diamonds from Heaven. LSD
in the Mind of the Universe is the
publishers's title. My title is Diamonds
from Heaven. I did not even try to
attempt that until after I was retired
and until I was after the statute of
limitations and I knew that neither the
state of Ohio could would couldn't fire
me and the federal government couldn't
come after me. But that is not the way
it's supposed to be, is it? Indigenous
cultures, you come out of a deep
experience. The first thing you do is
you share it with the elders because
first of all, it's not your private
vision necessarily. It's not necessarily
about your private life. It's about the
life of your tribe. It's about the
larger life. And so the elders are your
first people to share it with. But in my
world, there were no elders and there
was no sharing. And so it involved a
very long process of holding and just
holding and digesting this material
personally, individually, sharing it
with my wife in very small circle. But
it it it really had to be contained in
that way. And that's not something I
would wish on anybody. And I'm very glad
that we're coming to a point in history
where no one else has to go through
that. that we can we have enclaves of of
people you can share and process this
work because I think it's really
important to share and process this work
together uh and to draw from other
people's experience and to have to be
able to say out loud uh what are
probably for many of us the deepest
experiences of our life. All right.
Yeah. Can
>> I add something real quick to that?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. I think talking about the
indigenous cultures, I mean, one of the
reasons that they used them so
successfully for thousands of years in
some cases is because they had a
framework for respecting and valuing
these types of experiences. And they
also had a cultural blueprint for when
people came back about how to integrate
and understand what they had experienced
and learned. And uh they were able to do
these uh things safely and productively
for thousands of years. And I think one
of the issues with our culture is that
we were up against even in the 60s that
there was no framework for understanding
or acceptable way to use these things.
We were all criminals by taking them
just in and of themselves. And so I do
think that's a role everybody has right
now. We're still very early in this
renaissance uh period. And uh I think
everybody has a responsibility to learn
about these substances and how to use
them responsibly and safely and to also
be freely teaching other people that are
curious about how to use it. Um so I
think that's a responsibility all of us
have here.
>> Yeah, thank you guys so much for sharing
that. You know, as part of my own
personal work, I've guide people through
highdosese psilocybin experiences as a
harm reductionist. Um and it's deep and
it's profound and and in many ways uh
you know I feel as much as a a
facilitator as a doula at times and how
the the nature of how reorientation and
your own perspective can be that uh
paradigm shifting that you have to
reaclimate yourself to how you engage
with family and friends and and and what
that means to you now. You can't unknow
what you know you know so with that new
imprint and within you you have to kind
of set sail into a new trajectory. So
that support structure is so so critical
and uh and in that and in that
consideration there I think two things I
wanted to ask you specifically uh Chris
is um you know how first were you able
to you know how did that impact your
family your you know your your father
you have you know a wife and and you a
wife at the time that was supporting you
there and you you know have a new
partnership now and and all those things
that have transpired you know how were
you able to kind of endure in that in
that time period there and um and yeah
we we'll stop for that one right now and
then I have a kind of follow-up to that.
But you know what was what was your
practice essentially to be able to do
that?
>> Uh first I had a couple of strategic
advantages. I had uh a PhD in philos in
religious studies and philosophy of
religion and so I had the opportunity to
study
um theology and the history of mysticism
and mystical traditions. I I studied
eastern and western traditions. I taught
in both traditions. I taught in eastern
traditions. I taught courses in
comparative mysticism. So I really I
really spend a lot of time with the
great masters and psychedelic experience
and great master contemplative
experience. These are two different
genres of experience. Okay? Psychedelic
experience is temporary. You have to
deal with the temporariness of it from
the very beginning. You have to use
those hours as productively as you can.
But you also have to deal with the fact
that you are going into this elevated
state and then you're coming back out of
it. Then you sit and absorb and then
you're going into it again and you're
coming back out of it. Contemplative
practice is different. There is a
fluctuation in and out but it's a much
more of a uh you you get to hold on to
more of what you break into. In the
psychedelic state it's not like that. Uh
and so the process of stabilizing,
keeping yourself grounded in the world
and absorbing this and holding the
position is really important, especially
if you're working with a psychedelic, a
powerful psychedelics that's pushing
boundaries and breaking structures and
and taking you in places that relatively
speaking very few people have gone and
certainly very few in the academic
community, if any, have gone. So you
don't have any of that type of
intellectual support for it.
Uh you know when Jung went on his deep
episode and of uh when he broke with
Freud and he went into this tremendous
self exploration and he faced this
tremendous being overwhelmed by the
content flooding up from his psyche. He
said what grounded him was his family
and his work and he would say to himself
every day sometimes this is this is who
I am. this is where I live. These are
the people I live with. These are my
family. These are my children. And I
think that's really true for me. It was
family.
We had children raising children. And it
was my students. It was that wherever I
was on Saturday, on Tuesday, Monday or
Tuesday, I was back in the classroom. I
was teaching my classes. The other thing
that was really important for me for
stabilizing is to have I had a a
sustained spiritual practice that a
meditative practice. My partner at the
time, Carol, was a serious uh meditator,
contemplative practitioner. Uh and that
was very grounding. It was to know the
lives of the great masters and they were
my role models for what could be
achieved and to use them as my role
model and to uh commit myself to a daily
practice that allowed me to absorb not
only intellectually or consciously but
to absorb in my body to absorb the
subtle energy the shifts in subtle
energy that psychedelics activate.
Because you know when you states of
consciousness are states of body. So
when you enter extremely deep states of
consciousness your body you're asking
your body to go into extremely state
deep states of of consciousness states
of body. And when you enter very very
pure states of awareness your body goes
through intense detoxification processes
which continue long after the session is
over. So I had the opportunity to
understand that within the mystical
tradition so that it gave me an
opportunity it gave me a knowledge that
I used to ground myself in the world.
But it I think to me it was the
commitment of u of career the commitment
of teaching in my students and the
commitment the commitment of working
with my children and my family.
>> Yeah. Thank you so much for sharing
that. And you know that's that's so
important to to recognize is the
immersive quality of the psychedelic.
You get that deep profound experience
but as it then starts to subside then
that's where the practice really truly
begins. You know how do we synthesize
that into life? Choose actions choose
holistic praise to allow that to become
part of our our walk of you know to
sustain and support those revelations
through through life changes and and and
healthy healthy living and wellness.
After
I stopped my sessions in the very end
stages, one of the things consciousness
told me and it was important to me at
the time was there's the dying of
discovery.
And we know what that's about. But then
there's the dying of keeping. The dying
of keeping is different than the dying
of discovery. It's what h it's what you
do when you come back so that you can
hold on uh to these experiences in some
meaningful way and integrate them into
your life in some meaningful way.
>> Thank you Chris.
So Dr. Turpin I have a little bit of a a
different angle here for you. So
so it's no no secret that you're
accomplished psychedelic professional.
you know what you've been able to attain
with the Pearl Psychedelic Institute,
which is only one of two facilities
right now that are approved for expanded
access trials and NDMA and treatment for
PTSD. And you recently had uh uh uh
someone move through one of those uh
trials and I just want to go ahead and
give a round of applause for the
incredible amount of work just to do
that uh get it to this level. You know,
a lot of lot of hearts, a lot of hands
that have had that happen there. But one
of the things that I think you've been
able to accomplish is you hold both of
these different traditions. One is the
extremely diligent therapeutic
professional lane that has to be every
eye dotted, every tea crossed to really
solidify that particular track. And
simultaneously on the other hand, as you
had alluded to
several times, is your deep love for
Grateful Dead and the ecstatic
tradition. Mhm.
>> That other that other frontier that is
uh you know perhaps all encompasses a
little bit more wild west but does have
a lot of power of community in some ways
I think has had more influence on
culture than any ceremonial or
therapeutic the the frontier of this
particular tradition. So I want to get a
sense of um what your thoughts are on
the importance of both of these
particular pathways and take your time
with this. I know there's a lot going on
there. porn into both of these
particular pathways and then how you
feel that they can both be held not as
you know this grateful dad is the ugly
stepchild of psychedelic you know use
but how can we ac embrace both these
pathways uh and the importance of them
furthering this renaissance furthering
this culture
>> good question I think it's doable I
think it's necessary um yeah I think uh
you know the the medical model that
we're kind of all kind of well that
we're kind of pursuing right now. Uh it
gets a bad rap from a lot of folks. Um
and when you look back historically 50s
and 60s, early 70s when psychedelic
research was happening, you know, it was
old white guys. They were all doing it.
There wasn't people of color involved.
Um and it was this very kind of stodgy
uh sciency thing. Guys in white lab
coats even for a while there. And uh and
so I think that there's some criticism.
some of it is uh appropriate um that you
know that you know if we just keep this
to be the province of doctors that we're
going to miss out on a big piece of what
we're we're trying to accomplish here.
And I think Albert Hoffman even said
whatever you do don't leave this only in
the hand of the doctors. This is right
before he passed away. And uh but I
think that there's a couple things to
think about. I think that the way our
culture is set up, I honestly feel like
the way that we are going to finally get
to maybe get one of these schedule one
psychedelics across the finish line
towards approval is going to have to be
through this medical model. It's going
to have to show that it maybe
successfully treats mental illness and
other issues that maybe we're not so
successfully treating right now. Um, and
so, uh, I do feel like that that is
going to be important, uh, to be able to
do that. Um, I think one of the reasons
MAPS and Rick uh Doblin chose to push
MDMA as that first one is that unlike uh
LSD and psilocybin which can create you
know pretty profound perceptual
distortions and sometimes some
disorientation MDMA even when you're in
the throws of a pretty heavy uh uh dose
is that there is a mental acuity that
stays present and people tend to have
good recall later about what their
experience was and you don't have that
disorientation and typically not the
perceptual disturbances. And so I think
he thought very wisely that that would
probably be an easier one to get the
authorities, the FDA to consider uh
passing and um uh accepting and making
it approved for medicine. So I think
that that is it's a legitimate uh track
of research and I think it's a
legitimate way to try to get it in
across the line in our culture to get it
initially accepted. Um you know now in
the 60s it started off that way. it was
in the lab. Um, even Timothy Liry once
he started doing his psilocybin research
in Harvard, you know, he had people like
Aldis Huxley and Gerald Herd and these
philosophers and writers coming in to uh
Harvard and having psilocybin sessions
done with him. And uh, Aldis Huxley was
very adamant about do not let this get
out. You need to be careful about who
you turn on. You need to turn on the
writers and the musicians and the
philosophers and the leaders and you
need to introduce it to the culture in
this way. And then Larry being at the
forefront of this thing who didn't, you
know, he didn't know what he was doing.
And this guy was a deep was a deeply
flawed human being. I am a big Tim Larry
fan, but he was a deeply flawed human
being. And one of the things he said was
that he made the decision that this
should be an egalitarian experience that
he felt like it was the fifth freedom
that everybody should be able to manage
their own nervous systems. And so he
said thereby hangs the tail when he made
that decision that it needed to be
available. And so the problem was he
went out there telling everybody
everybody's got a right to take LSD.
Everybody has a right to find their
inner god or whatever it was that uh
people could find. Um but the trouble
was people would take it, go to a party,
their childhood sexual abuse would come
up. They would have no support. They
would not be an appropriate setting and
they'd end up in the ER and on the front
page of the newspaper. And so enough of
those happened and it gave the
government everything they needed to do
to try to shut all this down. So, I
think that we have to be very careful
about how it's uh put out there in some
ways. And I do think right now one of
the advantages we have that we didn't
have in the 70s is the internet. You're
not going to put this genie back in the
bottle at this point. There's too much
information out there. Too many people
know about these substances and in a lot
of cases how to use them safely because
there is some good information out there
on the internet. So, um I do feel like
that this medical model is uh for good
or ill the the necessary model that we
need to use to try to start to establish
these things as medicines. And if our
culture can maintain some wisdom and
some objectivity in order to continue to
uh rate to measure these compounds
objectively as medicines, then we're
going to have a much better chance of
getting these things approved. So, uh so
that's kind of that statement. uh over
here. Um I had a lot of fun. Uh I had a
lot of growth. I had a lot of spiritual
experiences that were just unbelievable.
And these were not under clinical
supervision. Um you know, and when you
look back on the use of psychedelics,
plant medicines, uh ritual and
celebration was a huge fundamental human
thing that people did and oftentimes
psychedelics were a part of that. And so
I think that ability to celebrate being
alive, being here on this planet, being
with your friends, listening to great
music or whatever it is that you're
doing, camping or whatever you're doing,
I think that's also a very important
piece of this. I do think that there is
more risk taking that model. Um, I
definitely went to some shows and saw
some people really struggling that
probably should not have been there
doing what they were doing for whatever
reason. But uh the dead was it it
eventually evolved into what I call just
it was psychotherapy on a mass scale. It
felt like you'd have about 25,000 people
in there, most of them tripping on
something. And this music was very uh it
was born of LSD. I mean Alsley, who was
their patron saint, was probably the
largest LSD chemist in the history of
humanity. And he was basically uh buying
their equipment and feeding them LSD.
And so they were high all the time
figuring out how to play their music
together. And so this music that came
out was an amalgamation of all these
different styles of music, jazz, rock
and roll, blues, Dixie Land, uh
experimental. And so you had this very
bizarre uh yet somehow familiar type of
music that came out. And uh and I think
it spoke to a lot of people particularly
when they were in these states. Uh
Robert Hunter and a lot of the lyricists
for the dead. They wrote very mythical
arctal types of songs. The lyrics were
very I could a song would mean something
to me for five years and then I'd be at
a show going through a particular
experience in my life and that song
would speak to me in a completely
different way that I had been turned off
had not been aware of before which is
what great art does. There's just levels
of it in there. And so it was this just
continuing flower for uh I guess 85 to
95 for 10 years. It was my
psychotherapy. But I felt like that they
had it set up in a way that there was
somewhat of a container. There were
rituals around it from getting the
tickets to getting there early to
getting in line to getting your seats,
taking care of each other when you're in
there. There was there was an idea that
everybody was there to take care of each
other that you don't really see too much
at shows anymore these days,
unfortunately. But back in the day,
there was really that ethos at the
Grateful Dead show. So, it did feel like
a fairly safe place that you could go
and let it all hang out and with a lot
of other people. And I can remember
times opening my eyes with 20,000 people
synced up and everybody grooving. And I
mean, I just felt like my head was going
to explode. It was felt so good. And and
you realize that there was just a lot
more to life than the one-dimensional
life that we kind of get up and go to
work and do a lot of days. And that sort
of inspired me and inspired a lot of
other people and a lot of other bands. I
mean, a lot of that there's a lot of
other bands that came out of that scene.
So, I think to answer your question, I
think that that whole uh realm of
psychedelic exploration is absolutely
important. It's absolutely necessary, I
think, but I think that people have to
recognize that there's a little more
risk that comes with doing them in that
kind of environment. And so you need to
take it upon yourself to educate
yourself about whatever it is you're
taking, who you're with, knowing
something about set and setting, so that
you can go and have a safe and
productive good time.
>> Thank you, Raymond. Yep. There's, you
know, the movements that have spawned
from that. Many of our favorite bands
from Fish to my personal STS9. I have to
give them a little credit out there, but
on Mo and and also other cultures,
Rainbow Gatherings, Burning Man. This is
all from the stimulation of that radical
creativity, communas, you know, the
environmental connection that comes
through that. And I think it's important
people forget, you know, the Elocian
mysteries were the Greek uh sacred
ceremonial mysteries with the ceremonial
theater of initiation with the kaikon
which is the elixir and beverage that
was found to have urgot which is the
base component of LSD25. 2 to 3,000
people would go through those mysteries
at the same time. So the idea of large
alchemical ecstatic ritual is as old as
humanity and an important part of this
of our of our lineage and our process.
Um so so Chris I want to ask you about
now this high-end dosaging because now
as we've we've talked about you know
most of the time when you're looking at
the research studies you're working with
you know psycholytic doses maybe a
moderate dose you know everywhere from I
know with um with psilocybin be like
about a gram to about an 3.5 grams or so
and there's a lot of deep value there
that can come through that particular
experience and is profound um as well um
but most of the time that works with
your biographical healing you know your
own personal wounds and traumas and kind
of working back to that state of uh
acceptance, release, um self
forgiveness, reconciliation. Um but why
the high dose you know like and you know
there as you talked about there you know
there's a concept of spiritual maybe
self-actualization those things but um
you know is there a realm currently
right now for people to push further and
if there is you know what is it that I
think as a collective we might be
seeking in that particular space.
First of all, I really agree with you,
Raymond, that uh it's the medical work
and the therapeutic work with
psychedelics which is bringing
psychedelics back into our society. And
that's that's so important. And it's so
important that we do it well. And it's
so important that we document the
therapeutic capacity.
And as we do and once we do that and
once we get it back in then the question
naturally arises okay if it's an
amplifier and if it amplifies our
consciousness and if it pulls up all
these dark things and we can address
them and heal them and and reestablish
some type of spiritual communion with
the universe around us then how far can
we take it what what's going to happen
next and and uh I think that it's going
to take some time and some people are
already of course pushing what we're
where where where can it go next but in
terms of institutional exploration we're
not there yet but we will be it's just a
matter of time uh because in these
states it's it's not the psychedelic
that does the work it's consciousness
that does the work psychedelic is an
amplifier and so when you get right down
to it it's the psychedelic that does the
work that and so if you handle the
conscious iousness carefully. You can
use it in the same way that happens on a
on a meditation cushion at a Zen
sasheen. And that's I call my work
sessions. I'm very specific about that.
And it it's really a play on the
Japanese word sashin. A sasheen is a
period of concentrated spiritual
practice. All right? And so that's the
way I think of my psychedelic work is
there were x number of sashines and I
can tell you exactly what I was doing on
one particular day in one particular
year on one particular session in that
process.
I really do I honestly sincerely do not
recommend that people do what I did
honestly. I mean there's so many ways
for this to go wrong and I was fortunate
and I had a constitution that I found uh
I had a capacity to open up into great
breath uh and to get very fluid and to
dissolve and lose my boundaries at level
after level and then I could congeal uh
naturally at the end of the day. Not
everybody is built like that. Not
everybody has that capacity. People need
more support going into this type of
work. Uh, and I wouldn't do it the same
way over again. I just would not. I
would be much gentler with myself. I
would work with a balance of high doses
occasionally, lower doses, uh,
psilocybin balancing with LSD maybe and
iawasa. But I really would take a much
more nuanced uh, balancing approach,
integrative approach. I mean, there's
kind of a breakthrough session and then
lower dose work maybe with psilocybin to
absorb and integrate that material. But
one of the reasons I would do it
differently than I did it when I did it
is because I had this mindset in that
when I did this work first of all that I
was it was personal and that I learned
it's not personal personal is the first
layer but if you push in deeper then the
dynamics of your work stop being
personal they become collective you're
working with the collective psyche
you're working with and then you're
working with an evolutionary process
you're working with an historical
process and and the visions are not
personal visions. They're historical
visions. They're human human visions.
And it's a different scale. But I
thought when I did this work, I thought
that the goal was to get somewhere. The
goal was to become enlightened or to
become one with God or to dissolve into
the metacosmic void as Stan used to say.
And uh what I learned is about
17 years into my work, 16 years into my
work when I was as deep as I would ever
go in my psychedelic exploration. I was
in the diamond luminosity and I was in a
sweet spot way beyond time and space
resting in the luminous body of the
divine in Dharmakaya.
In that context, I had a visionary
experience. The the world opened and
showed me a world far in the distance,
a light-filled world, and a ray of light
hit me from that world and it absolutely
shattered me. It took me 20 minutes to
kind of pull myself back together into
the lime and luminosity condition. And
that's when I learned it's an infinite
progression. There's no such thing as
getting to the end of it. you're not
going to get to the end of it. No matter
I couldn't get to the end of it. And
that's when I began to appreciate that
it's really about opening up, letting as
much of the wisdom and of the healing
energy and the insight energy that the
universe get letting as much of it in as
you can manage as you can handle,
absorbing it, digesting it. It's not
about getting to a condition of
awakening or getting into a condition of
God realization. I mean those are all
fine. And those are all wonderful as
they come. But as a psychedelic path,
it's not about getting to a condition.
It's about really how you live your
life. So I'm much more attentive now or
are conscious now of the dying of
keeping, the process of the dying of
keeping, how you live with those
experiences. Because truly I'm I'm going
to be doing some teaching soon in the
ketaman assistant training program. uh
what's in in San Francisco
>> and I'm pardon
>> Polaris
>> Polaris. Yeah. And it my job is
integration talking about integration
and talking you know our discussion of
integration
works well when you're working at the
psychonamic level or the personal
unconscious level. Even when you're
having spiritual experiences, you're
tapping into the, you know, the
intelligence that runs through all
things and you're tapping into uh, you
know, your divine nature, which is part
of the nature that runs through all
things. We have spiritual models for how
to integrate those experiences. But when
you push deep into the deep waters, when
you're really tapping into deep levels
of the infinite and when you're
transcending time, how the [__] do you
integrate those experiences? What does
integration even mean? How does a finite
being integrate the infinite? How does a
being which is a time space being who's
finely tuned to the dynamics of of
linear time and three-dimensional space,
how does that being integrate
transtemporal experiences, trans spatial
experiences? What does it mean to
integrate them? And and so I think we
have to sort of stop erase everything
that we've learned about integration or
much of what we've learned when we're
talking about working at the personal
unconscious level and it becomes
something different. Uh and I think we
can learn a lot from the indigenous
cultures.
But I also think that if we look at the
psychedelics that indigenous cultures
were using and we're looking at the
psychedelics that are available to us
today and the therapeutic protocols that
are available to us today, it's not an
unreasonable
hypothesis that we are pushing deeper
than many of the indigenous cultures
pushed. And that raises challenges that
go beyond even what we can learn from
the indigenous cultures on how to
navigate those those encounters. Um, I
think we're going to get there. We're
going to get to these issues eventually.
I don't think we're going to get to
these issues probably while I'm alive.
I think this is going to take time. It's
going to take time for Raymond and all
the Raymonds in this movement to really
achieve a true grounding in our culture
of these psychedelics. And then we can
start to open up the deeper door. And
then we'll And then we start to open up
a deeper door still. And a deeper door
still. It's going to take I think it's
going to be generations moving into this
material. This is not shortterm work as
a culture. This is long-term work
because what we're talking about is not
just learning that there is a wisdom in
the universe that there is an
intelligence guiding the universe or
birthing the universe in the big bang
process and the unfolding process. But
we're talking about changing or
expanding, radically expanding our
fundamental
communion with that universe,
>> then that that's a a deep deep journey
for all of us to be making culturally
together.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Thank you so much, Chris. You
know, because the next the next actual
question I had was showing how rapidly
we're moving. And I think that's really
important that you immediately caution
that with slowing down and being patient
with the synthesis of what this means on
such a transcendental level of of of you
know what it can mean for culture for
civilization as a whole. Um because you
know looking at the current renaissance
you know right now we have over 350
universities opening formal psychedelic
research departments. Um, we have 25,000
op-eds and over 2,000 peer-reviewed
journal articles published on
psychedelics in just the past two years.
FDA's impending clearance of MDMA in
2024 for therapeutic use and
decrimalization movements across the
country, city and state. Um, so we are
hitting a a momentum unprecedented to
this level at this time. And um, and of
course, you know, from Oprah to Aaron
Rogers, you know, to, you know, you turn
on the TV and every other day there's
another celebrity having an experience.
So it's, you know, the genie is very
very much out the bottle. Um, but this
idea of that this is going to leapfrog
us directly into a space where everybody
has touched upon the illumination of the
psychedelic, we're all ready to uh fully
synthesize that into daily life. I think
that's something that's going to take a
lot of time uh to do it right to have
the ethics and honoring and respect of
the deep time of the lineages and the
indigenous that come before us. Um, so
this is kind of uh this question is
open-ended, but you know, where do you
see this headed in the in next few
years? You know, I think uh from your
behalf, Dr. Turban, you're working right
on the front lines of legality. So,
you're preparing for the g the at least
the the gate of MDMA to open up and you
know, there's there's a lot of work
there. I know uh just from the from the
the the side part of that all and uh and
what do you have um for advice um for us
as we continue to step into this
ourselves as as people that are wanting
to be caretakers of this medicine
culture and movement and what do you
think from your experiences going from
the deep depths of the underground and
the shadow days to now where we are
where it's you know it's now becoming uh
contemporarily acceptable to be open
about it. So those two questions there,
where do you see this immediately
happening and how's that going forward?
>> Good question. Um
h well uh you know if taking a
psychedelic made you a better human
being then we would all be probably
three4s of our country would be Buddhas
by now. Um so taking a psychedelic
doesn't necessarily make you a better
human being. I think there's so much
about intention and so much about the
integration as far as what are you gonna
do with the experience that matters. And
so I think um that we've got to continue
to educate people about the importance
of that, that it's not just taking the
compound, it's really doing the ritual
work afterwards. And and you know, when
people come into our ketamine program, I
tell them right off the bat, don't
expect the ketamine to do the work. You
know, it might make you feel great. It
might absolutely uh you know you might
lose a lot of your depression symptoms
you've had for 20 years. But if you
don't take the insights that you gained
in that experience and bring them into
your everyday life, maybe do a little
less of this or more of this, then
chances are you're going to regress back
to baseline in four to eight weeks. And
so there it's so important that people
understand that these things are windows
into the unconscious and windows into
the deep self. I like to use the Yungian
giantes self that you know the self is
this almost limitless thing underneath
our you know it's part and parcel of our
ego but our ego is just a tiny little
part of this giant self and that the
self is this knowing. It is this inner
healing intelligence. It knows what we
need to be whole and balanced and it's
always pushing to be known whether it's
through dreams or psychedelics or
whatever. And so teaching people how to
uh understand that these experiences are
glimpses. Um they are they're they're
instructional dreams almost. They're
glimpses into their deep self. And then
teaching people how to value and bring
these things forward is going to be the
key. Um so I do see things uh moving
along uh at a pretty quick pace, quicker
than I ever thought. I mean I was at the
point where I was like, damn, I'm like
50. I don't know if this is ever going
to happen. Maybe I need to think about
going into the underground. But then
MDMA showed up, you know, and I was
like, "Wow, okay, maybe maybe it's not
too late. I'm still upright. Maybe I got
another 10 or 15 years. That's good."
So, uh, I was really excited to see that
happening. And, uh, you know, I think we
all again have such a responsibility to
educate other people. Um, people that
are curious about these things so that
they get good information that's
grounded in science, that's grounded in
tradition, that's grounded in love and
self-caring and self-acceptance. It's
all so important as we go forward with
this. Um what was the second part of
your question?
>> Yeah, I think for the insight as to
advice of us moving forward as a
collective and um then you know what you
see immediately too with the MDMA and
Pearl and that moving forward.
>> Yeah, the MDMA is interesting. Um right
now uh what I'm hearing and uh Haley
correct me if I'm wrong is that MAPS is
in the process of getting their new drug
application in place to submit to the
FDA. The phase three studies are over.
We are treating our last three uh for us
MDMA patients and that's all been
closed. The last patients are being
treated and then I'm I understand that
there is about a pallet or two of paper
that have to be submitted to the FDA in
a new drug application and so that all
is going to get submitted hopefully
maybe by early next year maybe it sounds
like and then everything I'm hearing is
that hopefully if things go well
sometime next year around this time
maybe late 2024 we might find it
approved for PTSD. Um the problem is is
that how long is it going to take for
insurance companies to then get on board
and be willing to reimburse for these
treatments? Um they are 46 47-hour
protocols. There's two uh guides or
therapists every step of the way for
good reason. I don't see that model
changing uh after acceptance. Um one of
the things I do see is right now in the
expanded access model is the treatment
team has to be made up of a lead
therapist that's either an MD or a
psychologist and then the co-therapist
has to be a licensed therapist. And I
think what we're going to see after we
move into approval is that one of the
treatment team is going to need to be a
licensed therapist who's been trained by
MAPS. And then technically the other
person could be someone that's not a
therapist. It could be a nurse. It could
even be a clergy member. It could be
somebody else as long as they have been
properly trained by MAPS. And so I think
that's going to be key to bringing the
cost down is having that be the team
makeups be a little bit more reasonable
like that. Um, and one of the reasons we
did a nonprofit was to try to figure out
a way to generate funding so that people
could access things like ketamine and
MDMA because it is going to be expensive
for most people until insurance
companies do get online. Um, so uh, and
I also think that there's going to be an
enormous need to train therapists on how
to do MDMA work. MAPS has been doing a
really good job of getting people
through their training program, but it
gets you all the way to the last step.
And so essentially we have hundreds of
therapists out there that have gone
through the MAPS training but they lack
what's called the supervised clinical
experience which is where you actually
treat somebody from the beginning to the
end of the protocol under clinical
supervision. That's the final step to
being certified. So we're going to have
a bit of a bottleneck I think of
therapists um at at when it gets
approved. And so one of the things we're
trying to do at the Pearl is that my
treatment partner Kim Skelton and I are
trying to treat enough folks and beg the
folks at MAPS enough to where we could
be a facility where some of these folks
from Asheville and in North Carolina
could come and hopefully finish their
training, get their certification done
with us without having to go out of
state and do that. So, um, so I would
suggest for people that are interested
in continuing to facilitate this opening
of psychedelics or this reopening of
psychedelics or wanting to get involved
in it, um, it's really about educating
yourself. Um, there are wonderful things
out there that you can learn from.
There's YouTube videos, there's great
books. Um, for people that want to do
MDMA work right now, you're going to
have to go through the MAPS program. Um,
that may open up in five, who knows,
years, who knows? But right now they're
the ones that have the uh protocol all
down and they're ready to train folks.
Um but uh and then I think psilocybin is
probably maybe everything I'm hearing is
like maybe three years behind. Uh
they're starting some of the phase three
studies and so that'll move on and
hopefully that'll be uh I think
psilocybin is going to have greater
utility than MDMA. I think MDMA is
always going to be dynamite for trauma
work and PTSD work and also for
relational problems, interpersonal
communication issues like marriage
counseling, couples work. Uh that was
what MDMA was shown to have great value
for in the early 80s before it became a
schedule one. And so I do see it
continuing to do that. And then I see
psilocybin having really wide uh
applicability to many different kinds of
issues. And I never thought I'd see LSD
getting studied in my lifetime. And it's
actually the doors cracking open on that
one, too. And that's a little harder
because you're looking at 10 to 12 hour
sessions, which as Stan said, were
brutal. You know, to have to be in there
that long. Even an 8 hour MDMA session
can be long. We're exhausted by the end.
By 6:00 when the overnight person gets
there, we're like, man, we're ready. So,
uh, so anyway, I think things are on a
good track. Um, I'm always worried
something crazy is going to happen and
be on the headlines and then it's going
to set everything back. But um you know
so far we've gotten pretty lucky and I
think part of that is because of the
internet and there's been a
dissemination of information out there
that wasn't there back in the 70s and
60s about what how these things operate,
what they do in the brain, the
importance of set and setting and how to
have how to be able to use these things
safely and responsibly. So my advice
would be able to just keep your eyes
open and see what's coming down the
pipe. MDMMA is I think going to be the
first one that gets approved hopefully
and uh if you're interested in going
into that work um get the background
that you need to be able to apply to
MAPS to get the work done to get the
stud the training done and uh and then
again just continue to model for people
out there that this is serious work and
we all take it responsibly and we have
an ethical it's incumbent upon all of us
to have this ethical responsibility as
we conduct ourselves out there because
people look at us and go oh you're a
psychedelic and they want us and I think
it's important that we uh are able to
comport ourselves in a way that we're
doing our part to help push these things
forward.
>> Uh
let me expand the context. I completely
agree with everything you're saying
Raymond. I really do in terms of
particularly applications of MDMA and
the broader role range of psilocybin and
we haven't talked about 5me DMT and its
therapeutic potential but I'd like to
expand the context a little bit. Um
those of you who know my work know that
my visionary experience is that we are
coming into a time of profound social
catharsis crisis transformational press
pre pressure and so when I look ahead 10
years
20 years and I picture this gathering
here 10 years from now 20 years from now
the background social context will be
radically different. We're moving into
profound crisis, an econ environmental
crisis, global climate change crisis,
which is triging going to be triggering
all sorts of economic and social crisis.
And that means political crisis and you
know when the ocean level is rising and
cities are flooding and uh millions of
uh ecological refugees are moving across
the planet.
the me the social instability is going
to be enormous. Uh and so that means if
we ask well what is the role of
psychedelics in that changing world it
it's not the simple therapeutic
processes of today but
my background
I believe in reincarnation I don't think
that's a hard cell in this crowd uh it's
a it's a standard part of my experience
in psychedelic work and and that means
that each one of us if our collective
culture is coming into a time of crisis
where we have to make life and death
decisions about how we live on this
planet and how we live with each other.
Inside we are carrying large pieces of
the history of humanity inside our being
in our reincarnational history. So
what's trying to take place in the world
around us is also trying to take place
in the world inside of us. And if I if
you are like me, you know that there's a
tremendous purification process taking
place. There's a tremendous
intergenerational
inner evocative process, inner healing
process. And it's like
that's why I think so many people are
doing yoga and meditation and and they
need all the help they can get to handle
the uprush that's coming from deep
within their psyche. And that's going to
increase. That's going to increase in
the decades ahead because this this
process we can't make the jump to where
we need to go to live on this earth
until we have digested and processed and
transcended
the history of our behavior on this
earth and the history of our behavior
with each other. And it has to come out
and it has to be dealt with at an
individual and a collective level in
order for us to be receptive to the
inflow the increased inflow of salvific
energy that's coming into us and moving
us into a different phase. So that means
the dance is changing. The stability of
our current world
hopefully will last long enough to allow
us to get these substances internal to
our system. But and when we move deeper
into crisis, I would see the role of
psychedelics for individual and
collective healing to increase
exponentially if we've done our work at
this stage well. Uh I and I think that's
just really really really critical
important. And so my suggestion for how
we move forward is we we can't simply
focus on our internal work. We have to
be focused as well on the external work.
We have to be working at the political
level and the social level and the
larger intellect international level as
well as working on the inner level. And
those are not separate processes. Those
are actually deeply deeply integrated
synergistic processes as we move
forward.
You know, it all changed with the
invention of the nuclear bomb, right?
When Eisenhower, who led us in World War
II, saw the pictures of the nuclear
bomb, he said, "That's it. That changes
everything."
And LSD is kind of like that came into
existence at the same period of history.
The inflow of indigenous cultural wisdom
comes in shortly thereafter.
Psychedelics change everything.
Tremendous intellectual revolution is
right around the wings, right around the
corner. Tremendous religious and
spiritual revolutions are right around
the corner because you know it just
unleashes
tremendous evolutionary forces in our
individual lives and in our collective
lives. How we handle that is going to be
really important. The festivals which
will be coming the the the collective
healing that takes place in these
festivals will be really important as we
move forward. Uh yeah, something like
that.
>> Thank you so much, Chris. You know, the
power of the social responsibility that
you gentlemen charge us with is is quite
profound and and not only for how we
hold these medicines ourselves and
caretake them and lead them out there,
but how we work with them collectively,
how we allow them to be uh part of our
larger uh maybe the catalyst for some
important shifts in our life and our
culture. And one of the things that I've
recognized working with psilocybin for
so many years is it it reminds us of us
being first and foremost children of
this world. you know, like the miccelium
that is underneath us, uh, you know, we
are stewards and caretakers of this
body, um, we are gifted with a garden
for us to tend and, uh, and the more
that we learn how to do that and and and
honor our differences and and symbiotic
relationship with those around us, uh,
that creates the foundation for, you
know, beautiful fruit and, you know,
intellectually, spiritually, emotionally
that we create together. So that's it's
a it's as old as time that that lesson
but uh it's new and it's needed more
than ever as well as we step into this
greater age of responsibility uh and
accountability. So so thank you all as
you're continuing to work with these
medicines. You know these are powerful
and profound um you know harm reduction
principles preparation navigation
integration and synthesis of those
caretaking of those around you is all
very very important part of the process
and and more than we know. So, um, we're
going to open up to questions here for
for from a couple of you, but let's just
again give a big round of applause and a
big thank you to Dr. Dr. B for their
wisdom today.
Okay. So, we have time for maybe uh two
or three questions. Uh, if you guys uh
wanted to uh share real quick. Anybody
have something? Uh, Steve right here.
>> Do I need the mic or just shout it out?
>> Uh, shout it out if you can there.
That's better.
>> Uh, Dr. Bash, I've read your book and if
anybody hasn't read LSD in the mind of
the universe, read that thing. I've read
it about six times and every time I go
in, I go deeper and deeper. I'd like you
to pontificate about or elaborate about
you talked about the 200,000year
gestation period that humanity is in
where it's just coming to transition
like in the birth.
>> Yeah.
>> Could you talk about that? Elaborate on
that a little bit.
The only way I can speak about that of
course is if I speak out of my visionary
experience. And so it's just visionary
experience and it is only visionary
experience. And it is visionary
experience.
The creative intelligence of the
universe does not think small, it thinks
large. It doesn't really think in terms
of just individuals. It thinks in terms
of whole species. It thinks in terms of
whole ecosystems and planetary
development. And so
ask yourself
what is the finest that human beings can
become?
What is if we look ahead what is the
finest that human beings can be?
And then imagine that the divine wants
it to be like that and it wants it to be
even more than that. The question then
is how do we go from baboons or
chimpanzees to that
>> and it takes time. It's a repetitive
cycle. Lifetime by lifetime we
accumulate more knowledge, more wisdom,
hopefully more understanding, more
wounds. So we're taking care of the
wounds. We're taking care of the past
while we're expanding potential lifetime
after lifetime. Thousands of years, tens
of thousands of years, hundreds of
thousands of years we've been at this
process. We have such a tendency to
think in terms of short-term
perspective. Achieve salvation, go to
heaven. Achieve enlightenment, go to par
nirvana. It's an up and out cosmology
which has been driving us. But the
divine doesn't think in terms of up and
out cosmology. It's about a continual
receding and a fruition that's taking
place on the planet and bringing us into
ever ever deeper levels of communion
with the creative wisdom of the universe
and the joy of the universe and holding
it in our body and holding it in place
and holding it in this world together in
peace and harmony with the other members
of the other species that we share this
planet with and with other everyone of
the human species that we share the
planet with.
My sense of what's happening is that
we're coming into a pivot point in
history where all of the lives that we
have lived, each of us can just look
around this room. Imagine how many lives
are being are sitting in these chairs.
How many hundreds of lives are sitting
in each chair
and all of those thousands of years of
experience sitting in each chair?
And my sense is what's happening in
history is that there's a coming
together. Not only a coming together on
the planet forcing on the changes that
that's taken, but there's a coming
together in the soul that all of our
former lives are coming together. And as
they come together, the first thing we
have to deal with is all their
unfinished business. So we got this pain
and that pain and that issue and that
trauma that comes from this life and
that life and we have to deal with that.
But as we deal with that, it makes it
easier for these lives to come together.
And all the it's not just the problems
that they're bringing that that may be
the first wave that shows up, but it's
all the learning that they're bringing.
It's all the knowledge that they're
bringing. It's all the history and
texture of their relationships that
they're bringing. And remember, these
lives have been black, white, every
every imaginable possibility on the
planet, every position in society, every
position in class, all the adventures.
And they're all coming together. And I
think they're coming together and
they're beginning a process of fusing.
And when in my experience in my sessions
when I experienced all my former lives
coming together and fusing there was an
explosion. It was like they hit a
critical mass and there was an explosion
and there was an explosion of diamond
consciousness that just broke out of my
chest and it threw me into a deep and
profound condition where I was an
individual.
But I wasn't an individual. I wasn't
Chris Bash and I wasn't an individual
with any frame of reference that I had
known before. But I was an individual.
But I was in a deep and profound cosmic
communion as an individual. And I think
that's what's happening to all of us in
history. Every continent, every person
on the planet is part of this process of
facilitating an integration of all of
our lives.
And this is what I call the birth of the
diamond soul. It is simply the birth of
the soul consciousness inside our human
incarnation.
So that when we experience ourselves, we
do not experience ourselves in any way
as defined by the beginning and ending
of this life.
We have a natural intuitive awake
awareness, conscious awareness of our
deep history, which means a conscious
awareness of our profound social
connection, a profound awareness of the
relativity of all these little fights
that we get into. You know, all these
stupid things that we have reasons to
get in conflict with that which are not
important and not relevant. We're
swallowing all these things as we come
together and I think we're moving
towards an explosion of soul
consciousness on the planet. I don't
think we can live on this planet out of
egoic consciousness and I think the ego
is a beautiful you know individual egoic
consciousness is a beautiful magnificent
thing but we cannot afford to live on
this planet out of that state of
consciousness. We either evolve into the
next state of consciousness which I
think is fundamentally the soul
consciousness or we go extinct and
extinction is a powerful psychedel
powerful transformational uh motivator
and I think that's the process that
we're coming into now. So
how long will this take? How fast can it
happen? I don't know. And when I've seen
it, when I've experienced it in my
sessions, it didn't come with dates and
it didn't come with with a brochure
detailing how it's going to take place.
But I but I've
know in my bones that it's happening.
And I also know from my I I offer you
from my visionary experience that we
will make it through this process. We
will survive. We will transform.
Humanity will make it through.
>> It won't look like we're going to make
it through for a time. It will look like
we're going to die in this process. That
is the death and rebirth process.
We're going to have to put it all on the
line. We're going to have to lay it all
down and make a complete radical
commitment to this process. But my
experience is that the diamond soul is
born in history.
The future human is born. And that
future human is magnificently beautiful.
Just beautiful.
beyond description and we see glimpses
of it in the great we see it in Christ
and we see it in the great in the
Buddhas and the prophets of history we
catch glimpses of what's emerging
forward and what's coming forward in all
of our lives we're being taken there and
we're not in control of this process
right we're not in control of evolution
we're hardly in control of our own
individual evolution there are deep deep
forces at work that are pushing us
driving us and Lastly, we all knew what
we were getting into before we
incarnated. We made a choice to be part
of this and we'll make a choice to be
part of the next generation. We chose to
be part of this evolutionary transition.
When you die, you don't want to just
have a comfortable life or an easy life.
You want to have a meaningful life. And
is there anything more meaningful than
supporting this transition that humanity
is making collectively so that we can
really learn to live together in peace
on this planet. Healed truly healed from
the heart of all the wars and all the
wounds and all the terrible things we've
done to each other. All the things that
were left unfinished lifetime after
lifetime. Imagine a species that's truly
healed all that stuff.
individually, collectively healed it.
Robert Monroe, whom some of you know
from his books on out of body and the
Monroe Institute, he his his intelligent
guides took him to a place in the future
which he estimated was about 3000 AD.
And in that time in the future when he
went there, the entire Bardo where souls
go in between their incarnations was
empty.
we had integrated the BTO because the
BTO is basically filled with soul
fragments just pieces of our lives which
we didn't get finished or whatnot.
Imagine all of those pieces integrated
into us so that we are now whole and
complete within ourselves within our
history and so is everybody else that
we're living with.
If the Bardau is empty, the divine
intelligence can reach more deeply, more
easily, more fluidly right into the very
center of our hearts and into our minds.
And that's what I think we're all
working for. That's what we're all
yearning for. That's what we feel it. We
can feel it in our bones. We touch it
when we do our in our individual
healing. We touch that and we know that
there's something a foot which is much
deeper even than our personal healing.
But our personal healing is part of it.
We have to go through that. If we're
going to contribute
to the birth of the diamond soul in
history. Yeah. Yeah.
Wow.
>> Well, I think we might have gone on time
with that, but and I almost don't feel
like it's even I don't know how you
could actually follow that up to be
honest.
Um, but we will be here for some time.
So if you guys want to connect afterward
um and and mingle and please do come up
and and share and these these gentlemen
will be here for a little bit of time to
connect. And so we're going to be
wrapping up this session but on behalf
of the psychedelic society of Asheville
we are so so grateful and honored to
have these wonderful guests do a
fireside chat with us here this evening.
>> So once again thank you guys so much
>> and please do uh stay in touch with us
here. We're psychedelic society.com. We
do once a month uh usually the final
Sunday or you know of of a gathering
together. We shift different topic
matters. We we have sometimes more back
and forth sessions. We're connecting
with people you know cross-pollinating
uh sometimes more harm reduction
guidance you know getting insights how
to do this safely ethically stepping
into this work in medicine with
education resources. Uh sometimes
bringing our creative friends in there.
We had a panel of artists uh that came
in and gave uh how this medicine has
influenced their beautiful crafts. Um so
please do be a part of this community.
We're we're openhearted uh and and
welcoming of all peoples and uh and and
stick around for a little bit and and
say hello to each other. There's a lot
of beautiful folks in here uh that we'd
love to, you know, continue to establish
relationships and friendships here. So
once again, thank you to Melissa and Joe
from Sky Mountain as well, helping us
have this beautiful setting for the
talk. kind of wish I was facing this
way, but uh this is excellent as well.
And uh blessings to you all and have a a
wonderful evening. Thanks for coming out
tonight.
>> Great. Thanks.
>> That's it.